thank you jack I'm very glad to see so
many he was so early in the morning for
me to roll out of bed this early I
wouldn't come to listen to me but I'm
glad you did the title I gave me was the
Incredible Shrinking Bill of Rights and
I thought maybe we do a little history
about this so-called Bill of Rights many
of you may know that when the
Constitution was adopted am I having a
small stroke or
you should take a little mile and up of
that and I think we'll pass
who is that Jack sounded like Jerry
Spence to me but I I don't know
in any event when the Constitution was
adopted
it had no Bill of Rights and none was
intended and free of the prospective
signatories walked out of the Convention
was George Mason John Randolph and
Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts and then
they sent the Constitution out and you
remember they they were so afraid they
couldn't get a unanimous vote on it from
the ratifying conventions I that they
made it 2/3 if you got 2/3 of the
colonies of the state's Constitution
were going to effect and there was a big
tussle in the big states which were
Virginia Massachusetts in New York fact
the Federalist Papers were created to
sell it to the ratifying convention in
New York but it still had no Bill of
Rights and there was such opposition to
ratification that they were afraid they
wouldn't get it through and then
Massachusetts its ratifying convention
met at Long Wharf in Boston and they
formulated a plan of how to get the
Constitution through and yet get a bill
of rights so they ratified and with a
caveat that the ratification would be
withdrawn if the first Congress did not
come through with the Bill of Rights and
with that New York followed suit
very close Virginia Massachusetts and
you already had five small states like
Connecticut Georgia and so on pardon me
Bobby Lee cook
but Georgia was a small state considered
been and the Constitution was ratified
first Unruh selected first president
elected and the first Congress met here
in New York City at Federalist Hall
which is now still in existence and
twelve amendments were proposed and went
out for ratification the first to have
died more or less on the bind they had
to do with salaries of Senators
Congressmen and so on and the third
which was freedom of speech became the
first and the ten were eventually
ratified and the ratification came on
December 15th 1997 ninety-one when
Virginia became the two-third state that
ratified the Bill of Rights so now we
had a Bill of Rights
unfortunately with the Bill of Rights
the House bill had made the Bill of
Rights binding on the states the Senate
bill took that provision out and as you
know it eventually took 600,000 lives
some 80 years later in the Civil War
post-civil war to begin the process of
making the Bill of Rights binding on the
states as well as the national
government if the House bill had stuck
maybe that those lives were not have
been necessary I don't know but in any
event they had a bill of rights binding
only on the federal government Congress
shall make no law and so on and so forth
and we take great pride in the Bill of
Rights
even though it's been systematically
destroyed one after the other
certainly in the last 20 to 30 years and
I classify now is the Bill of Rights
not only the first 10 amendments but I
think you have to throw in the 13th 14th
15th amendment to Civil War amendments
into that as well along with the
amendments with reference to women and
throw those all in and call them all the
Bill of Rights the Supreme Court and the
national legislature has done enormous
damage in destroying the Bill of Rights
you just have to look at some of the
recent decisions what I used to call the
Gang of Six or the gang of seven
depending on who was sitting in the
Supreme Court at any one time the first
amendment for example as you know
they've curtailed the rights of
prisoners to challenge unfair visiting
rules and in prisons they're restricted
lawyers in the Gentilly case handwriting
is all on the wall from speaking about
cases they restrictions on doctors in
counseling on the option of abortion and
today the national legislature in a
bipartisan move to some degree wants to
throw back the flag-burning decisions of
the Supreme Court both of which I had
the honor to argue both of which
resulted in 5-4 decisions that
flag-burning
as a protest was an element of free
speech and as you know an amendment will
soon be proposed to eliminate
flag-burning as a method of expression
protest expression
apparently it may get proved because the
legislation's of some 40 states have
joined it with recommendations that the
two flag-burning cases Aikman and
johnson be overturned and in that place
something prohibiting the destruction of
venerated objects or flags will have you
take their place that amendment was
sponsored as you know in the house and
the Senate and booth I guess soon be
going around for ratification in the
same manner as the original Bill of
Rights the second amendment will pass by
very quickly there's only one
organization in America that lives and
dies by the Second Amendment and that's
the National Rifle Association it's on
their stationery the only foot at the
amendment on the stationery path on
their headquarters in Virginia and they
leave out the militia part entirely
because they know how the interpretation
since the Miller case has been in the
Supreme Court that the right to bear
arms refers to a well-regulated militia
the third amendment I don't think anyone
here knows anything about or has had a
case about that's doing the quartering
of troops this was something the British
used to do pretty regularly I guess we
haven't had it for a while the
quartering of troops in private homes so
I guess the third amendment is really a
useless one at this moment but the
fourth amendment by which we all here
live and die that is in grave danger as
you know the cutting down of the
exclusionary rule began of course with
the idea that even if the warrant was
fully
if the constable in good faith believed
it wasn't faulty then
the evidence got in the exclusionary
rule did not apply the so-called good
faith exception to the exclusionary rule
now in the contract with America
you don't even need the warrant anymore
the language and I quoted it because it
was kind of interesting that the
exclusionary rule will not apply if the
officer without a warrant conducts a
search under the quote objectively
reasonable belief that it was in
accordance with Fourth Amendment with
the Fourth Amendment even if no search
warrant existed that's going to be the
new standard if that ever gets through
but they've broken it down so many other
ways when I was in law school you
couldn't hold suspects 48 hours without
a warrant now of course you can we
didn't have warrantless searches of
clothes bags and cars now we do justice
O'Connor rule in one case that you can
ask people in public transportation if
they want to be searched and that was
all right because they could always
refuse but you know you have standing
next year that man that appears in the
Western Union money orders the complices
sunglasses big brawny mister I'd like to
search your bag and you know very few
people are going to say no to that and I
guess if they say no it's probable cause
to search random drug testing federal
employees searches abroad of
non-citizens by US agents all has been
authorized
so the Fourth Amendment which really was
the gem of the Bill of Rights because
the thing they feared the most these
Colonials well they writs of assistance
the open-ended general read signed by
the King which existed as long as he
lived and all you didn't spell
the names when you want to use them they
were challenged as you know by James
Otis in that famous case in Boston which
he lost but the colonists were smarting
over these break-ins into their homes
where have ships meeting holes so the
fourth amendment was a very important
one and now it's being destroyed
piecemeal either by acts of legislators
or by the Supreme Court the fifth
amendment has long gone by the board
police now can mislead a suspect as to
his right to assign counsel during
questioning they execute defendants with
IQs 55 to 63 mental age of six and a
half 16 and 17 year olds okay they're
now working on on 15 year olds and 14
year olds to be executed with those IQ
55 to 63 or mental age of six and a half
it's like the British used to execute
mules who kick their masters I guess on
the theory that the other mules will get
the idea not to raise those I knows
against their masters that's what we do
when we execute people like that and as
you remember our beloved president when
he was governor of Arkansas flew back to
make sure that a person like this was
executed in Arkansas and that nobody
stood in the way of that execution the
police can destroy evidence even
exonerate of evidence defendant has to
show bad faith in order to do something
about that coerced confessions now
perfectly all right and as you know the
Justice Department has a nice
interesting little adage that federal
prosecutors are not bound by ethical
rules of the states in which they
practice but only by the attorney
rules and regulations so they've taken
prosecutorial misconduct out of the
realm of any state ethical rules victims
are allowed to testify in death penalty
sentencing phases as to the impact upon
them but they refused to allow a
victim's family to testify on behalf of
a defendant during such a a phase habeas
corpus is as you know so badly damaged
federal habeas corpus that it virtually
doesn't exist in so many areas you have
a new rule concept you have the aspect
of the state says no new evidence after
a certain period of time that that will
govern and control federal habeas
I just finished a case in Texas men
named Bobby Drew who was executed about
four months ago Bobby was sentenced to
death for the murder of a driver of an
automobile which he hitched a ride
young 16 17 year old born Alabama
Bobby was on his way from Vermont to
Texas to work for his uncle after he was
convicted
the real murderer confessed said he did
it Bobby was too chicken to get out of
the car
a witness who had testified that he had
seen Bobby near the body recanted and
reiterated testimony that had been taken
from him on a tape recorder an interview
which he said the same thing but because
the information came more than 30 days
after Texas rule that 30 days after
judgment of conviction no more new
evidence can be produced and so Bobby
was put to death many of you know the
story of Herrera Herrera was sentenced
to death for the killing of two police
officers in the Rio Grande Valley up
years after the murders years after his
conviction the son of the real murderer
came forward and said he had been in the
car one whose father shot the two police
officers the lawyer for that man came
for the man was dead
came forward and said he could now speak
that that man had confessed to him that
he had indeed shot the two officers more
than thirty days after the conviction
that's the case in which the Supreme
Court said innocence is irrelevant in
these habeas corpus cases and Herrera
was executed by lethal injection in
what's called the walls in Huntsville
Texas they have the inexcusable neglect
concept you don't raise it in your first
habeas you can't raise it your second
even though it came to you after the
completion of the first habeas you have
that streak of anguish by Justice
Marshall saying our court now has
conducting an unjustifiable assault on
the great writ procedural defaults in
state court proceedings knock out
federal habeas it's a situation where
federal habeas if you have any access to
a draw is in such jeopardy that's it it
says if it doesn't really exist we try
but so many obstacles have been erected
to federal habeas and as you know under
the contract with America it's even
limited further if federal habeas must
be resorted to I think there's a time
limit of one year in the contract of
America and they have knocked out funds
for capital defendants to procure their
writs of habeas corpus and prosecute
them whereas they are now giving more
money under the contract to state
prosecutors to defend against the use of
federal writs of habeas corpus
so the writ which I thought was the
great writ that was the name given to it
has now become the late Rick and I think
that it's going to have a powerful
impact on the practice of criminal law
on the sixth amendment as you know
thereafter lawyers all over the place
used to be that lawyers were relatively
immune from a lot of the the aspects of
criminal defense they couldn't be
disqualified readily readily they didn't
freeze the assets of your clients so you
couldn't be paid now they freeze Riko
assets as you know there's no free
counsel to indigent after the direct
appeal is over under the sixth amendment
we have anonymous juries I'll never
forget during the Nicky Barnes case the
second Nicky Barnes case one of the
jurors was known as juror 318 came to be
questioned and Frank Lopez turned to me
and says the 318 is at a Jewish name
but that's the thing you drove the
anonymous juries now you don't know who
you're getting unless you can see it on
their faces of the color of their skin
one district court judge in Washington
DC decided that he would carry that one
step further and he excluded the public
from the selection of jurors anonymous
jurors but when that was overruled by
the district from be a circuit he then
bought masks out of the auxilary fund of
the district court and the jurors would
wear masks in the jury box that was
overruled by the district from BIA
Circuit so finally he got money against
me exhilarated and over a weekend built
venetian blinds in front of the jury box
so they could hide the faces of the
jurors that too was overruled but maybe
he sees the handwriting on the wall and
maybe in the in the future we'll have
masks or public excluded from jury
selection or venetian blinds in front of
the jury box
rule 11 of course is a disastrous rule
they're trying to be APA is trying to
modify it at least somewhat provides
safe harbor but as one who has been
fined $125,000 in North Carolina I can
attest to the fact that it's a very
effective stimulant to avoiding federal
civil rights litigation it's been used
primarily against civil rights lawyers
the Director General Director Council of
the NAACP Legal Defense Fund was fined
$40,000 the leading civil rights lawyer
in Tennessee $45,000 the Christic
Institute 1 million dollars which put it
out of business in Florida rule 11 is a
is a horrible outgrowth it's not even a
congressional act did you know the rule
of the district court which is
formulated by the courts themselves and
not by the Congress and it is a
Jastrow I had a very lucky experience
just recently I was rule 11 with
Accenture by a judge by the name of
Cattell federal judge in the Southern
District of New York and it was
overturned by a three-judge panel of the
Second Circuit indicating in their
opinions that the judge was animated by
a prejudice against me personally but
the court thought against all activist
lawyers in general that's a rare win in
this business but rule 11 is a disaster
they're trying to modify it now they do
have a safe harbor provision 21 days to
alter what you may have put put in
pleadings but once you sign those
pleadings you're open for rule 11
we have many other aspects of lawyers as
you know contempt disqualification Oscar
Goodman is one good example to contend
process out west we have
disqualification I was excluded from
representing Sheikh Omar Rock month on
the grounds there was some alleged
conflict of interest Bruce Cutler was
disqualified from John Gotti's case
along with Shargel Gerald Shargel
and when they tried to employ James
LaRosa to take over the government put
roses name on the witness list they were
going to call of course they never
called him but he was done exclusively
Sagada had to reach down in Florida and
pull up the agent out of the kreega up
to New York I think he was here
yesterday so age has not disqualified
him from making that trip but in any
event he did not have the lawyers that
he wanted this is a very general
practice now we had more
disqualifications in New York then I can
ever remember happening before just two
days ago the case of Lynn Stewart was
argued in our pellet division he was
in order to testify the grand jury on
funds were seeing for representing
clients she refused she was indicted
under a felony statute fail to cooperate
with the grand jury which would have
meant a license because we have the
archaic rule here that any felony
conviction even if unrelated to the law
the Hickel homicide for example is
automatic Department in the state of New
York a federal a state judge threw it
out but the people are prosecuting still
and the appeal was argued just two days
ago in the Appellate Division first
Department so there are many many
aspects of what they're doing to lawyers
what they're trying to do the lawyers
Gerald Lefcourt is testing the provision
Jackson's flows certain funds and where
your funds came from to the government
and so on you're all familiar with these
but the objective is to cut the lawyers
down this all started in 1735 with the
case of Peter Zenger
John Peter Zenger the printer when his
two lawyers were disqualified disbarred
on the eve of trial to New York lawyers
and that required Andrew Hamilton to
come up from Philadelphia in order to be
the attorney for Zanger that's where the
term filled it up your lawyer first
materialized when he came up on the
board from Philadelphia successfully
defended zinger and then returned to
Philadelphia under the the seventh
amendment doesn't really pertain much to
us have to do as you know with civil
trials rather than criminal trials the
Eighth Amendment does of course now we
have mandatory life imprisonment for
cocaine possession by a first offender
we have preventive detention under the
so called bail Reform Act of 1984 one of
Reagan's little beauties that he left
behind
we have draconian sentences and
draconian prisons like Marion and now
the new ones that are floating around
Florence Mariana and so forth
only one judges had the courage to say
the Eighth Amendment should forbid
executions in this country unfortunately
he said it just as he was leaving the
bench and that was Harry Blackmun but
the Eighth Amendment I think is largely
a thing of the past I won't go into the
14 13 14 and 15
because the sense that's on the civil
side that's on the side of affirmative
action and so on which is not really the
function of most lawyers that are here
but what has happened the attacks on the
Bill of Rights whoever wrote the title
here said The Incredible Shrinking Bill
of Rights but the attack on the Bill of
Rights is an ongoing occurrence those
who are in power don't want it or don't
want to expand it want to shrink it as
much as they can in order to keep the
ship afloat and they think they can keep
that ship afloat mainly by destroying
the power of people to resist that type
of oppression by resorting to these
ancient amendments of 1791 in
considering all of this some time ago al
doctorow was a speaker at Brandeis at
their commencement and Brandeis which is
named after a justice of the Supreme
Court rather well favored justice of the
Supreme Court Brandeis decided that they
would not reprint Doctorow speech in the
alumni boat now it's not a First
Amendment case because they're a private
institution but the spirit of the First
Amendment is certainly violated by a
refusal of the school named after
Justice Brandeis to not print as they
always do a commencement address
in their alumni boat finally the Nation
magazine printed and then the trustees
of Brandeis relented and finally allowed
to be printed in the alumni magazine but
here's one of the reasons why they
didn't want to print it because dr.
Rowan considering he was talking about
the Bill of Rights he was talking about
social legislation that wasn't enacted
and if enacted was repealed or
sidetracked and he said this about our
country he said it's my view that in the
last decade or so in this country we
have seen a national regression to the
rava baronial thinking of the 19th
century this amounts to nothing less
than a deconstruction of America the
dismantling of enlightened social
legislation that had begun to bring it
in equity over a half-century to the
lives of working people to rectify some
of the terrible imbalance of racial
injustice and give a fair shake to the
outsiders the underdogs the newcomers we
may have in fact broken down as a social
contract in our time as if we were not
supposed to be a just nation but a
confederacy of stupid murderous blood
ins so that finally our country the idea
the virtue the truth of America is in
danger of becoming a grotesque now
Justice Douglas had prophesized this
many years earlier when he said our
Court is taking away the customary and
time-honored Bright's amenities
privileges and immunities that come
within the sweep of the blessings of
liberty mentioned in the preamble to the
Constitution many of the states of
course are rejecting what the supreme
court has done in many areas for example
in the area of the exclusionary rule
Massachusetts happens to be one of those
Minnesota and New York have refused
the good-faith exception to recognize
what is binding on the federal in the
federal courts governor william weld of
massachusetts when there was danger of
roe v wade being upset by the supreme
court asked for a legislative remedial
action if that was to take place i guess
in the long run what we have here is a
perennial crisis in seeking some form of
Liberty I guess it occurs in every
country countries get old they forget
the origins of their birth they forget
the ideals that brought them into being
in the first place and they become a
grotesque sel doctor wrote stated and I
think it's the role of lawyers as much
as possible because they sit in those
courts they watch the grinding of the
courts on human beings they have a
superb knowledge of what goes on and I
guess one of their responsibilities
should be to fight it every each of the
way not just to fight it because it
might need more money in the pocketbook
but because it's the right thing to do
and that lawyers can play a real role
not as chameleons on a television screen
in Los Angeles but in the courts of this
country in fighting oppression wherever
it rears its head on the road that we
travel I've spent a lot of my life
trying to do that sometimes I fail
sometimes I succeed but I always tried
to justify it in some way by having some
philosophical background to sort of make
the hard times a little easier to take
because there is a lot of pathos a lot
of tragedy a lot of deaths and injury
along the way
I've seen one of my clients with a hole
in his neck so big you can put your fist
through it lying on the corridor outside
his room in the Lorraine Motor Inn in
Memphis Tennessee I've seen another man
bleeding on the steps of his home in
Jackson Mississippi trying to crawl up
the stairs where the bullet in his back
Medgar Evers I've seen by all the Leos
oh not her body but the effect of her
murder
while sitting in the car between Selma
and Montgomery in Alabama a lot of
people I've represented whether it be
Malcom or anybody else I've seen vanish
from the scene under the bullets of
assassins and I've seen a lot of people
to rotting in jail who shouldn't be
there or who are expatriated or driven
into some form of exile because they
were standing up what they believed was
right and so I have tried to sort of
make a philosophical basis for enduring
all of this and I had now two that I
finally narrowed it down to when I was
in Attica on the last night Sunday
September 12th 1971 there was a friend
of mine there some of you may know him
and knew him
Sam Melville Sam Melville was arrested
with two other people a man and a woman
Jane Alford was one of them was the
woman for firebombing a chemical Bank
here in New York as a protest and he was
sent to Attica and we sat there the last
night before the onslaught the next day
and Sam his name was really not knowable
but he took the name from Melville the
writer he took the name because he found
in Moby Dick the answer to his
philosophical quest he told me that
Herman Melville in Moby Dick was saying
something
very profound so I said what do you mean
profound is just a whale story
the white whale Ahab and I said I had
seen the movie not Gregory Peck
but John Barrymore most of you saw
Gregory Peck I have to be a little older
than I guess most people hear to me it
was John Barrymore but in any event he
said no it's not just a whale story it's
a story of evil the white whale he said
in Melville's terms swims on unconquered
and uncomfortable and the question is if
the white whale represents evil it seems
to destroy everybody the Pequod a had
his latch to the whales back and drowns
the men in the open boat are swept into
oblivion by this swish of the whale's
tail but one man goes back to see
Ishmael the cabin boy is saved he floats
to safety on the coffin of chest Django
the Indian and he goes back to see he
said that's what Herman Melville meant
that you fight evil you'll lose a lot
along the way but there's always someone
to go back
there's always an Ishmaelite
unfortunately his head was blown off his
shoulders the next morning by
double-aught buckshot as the trooper
stormed in to dr at 8:45 on September
13th 1971 the second is the concept of
the Statue of David
I saw the Statue of David for the first
time in Florence in the Academy in the
50s when I went to Italy and to me it
was just a beautiful statue of a young
man the musculature all beautifully
portrayed I was standing next to the
statue when a man spoke to me
and said young man he seemed to be
pretty old at that time though he's
probably 20 years younger than I am now
he said young man he said you know what
that statue means what Michelangelo was
trying to do is beautiful look at the
eyes
the rock and the right hand the sling
over the left shoulder he's looking out
toward Goliath leaving the Philistine
down the hills of Galilee toward the
Israelites and he said that's just just
a beautiful statue Michelangelo is
saying to all of us over three three
years or so he's saying this is a young
man who was thinking of taking a chance
with his life it's the only portrayal in
art he said of the David Goliath story
done before Goliath was killed all the
rest Donatella's Bruns and the rest show
David holding up the severed hand of the
dead giant in triumph on his way toward
historical greatness but here he said
he's thinking about doing it he's one of
many Shepherd boys on the hills if he
doesn't do it no one will think the
worst of them no we'll even though it
cost his head he's saying to himself
like Prufrock I guess in the Eliot poem
do I dare do I dare he said this is the
point in everybody's life where a moment
comes when you may have to jeopardize
yourselves in one way or another it may
not be as fantastic as Philistines
coming down sixth Avenue here led by
Giants and so on but you'll know it when
it comes and you'll know you were tested
and you made it or you didn't make it he
said that's what Michael and Joe is
saying he's saying David are you going
to do it if you do it and you miss or
you don't kill them you're one dead
shepherd boy in these hills if you do it
and you win you're a hero to your
and you saved your lives your life and
theirs as well and that's stuck in my
mind the man I learned Elaine little
ain't learned that later learned was
Bernard Berenson who I found out was the
world's authority on Renaissance art and
who died several years later that has
always been my motto now if anyway you
come to my office as Dennis Roberts did
the other day he knows as a statue of
David that I boarded the Spanish Steps
in Rome about two and a half feet long
or high that I have the only problem
with it has been when we have Islamic
clients come to the office with their
daughters we have to turn the statue
around apparently the rear is okay but
the front is verboten I must tell you
one thing that Michelangelo may have
been a great sculpture but he did not
know our Hebraic custom of circumcision
because his David is not circumcised but
that's a I guess a passing fancy anyway
in any event I'd like to end seeing I'm
close to my time with a short poem by GK
Chesterton it comes from a poem called
the vision of the King and I love
literary references because they they
say a lot in a few words and make me
feel good in the morning sometimes in
the evening as well the GK Chesterton
wrote this poem about the Battle of
Athenry when the Saxon King Harold was
defeated by the Danes
and he has the King in his tent cleaning
his sword they're always cleaning this
or you know in these situations and the
Virgin Mary comes to see him and tells
him he's going to be sliced up the next
morning for hash by the Danes but that
life will go on and the struggle will go
on
this is this poem these eight lines is
so were the only editorial in the London
Times on the editorial page the day
after the last soldiers French and
British were evacuated from Dunkirk in
1940 remember the bad mock came down
isolated them near Dunkirk and by a
heroic effort of private boats naval
vessels they managed to extricate this
300,000 men so they could fight another
day as they did and bring them back to
England and this poem appeared as the
only editorial it was all at blank white
page except for these eight or so lines
that come out of the battle the vision
of the king by GK Chesterton and this is
the Virgin Mary speaking to GK to King
Harold telling him he's going to be
killed but that there's another day that
will come and she says to him this I
tell you not for your comfort yay naught
for your desire say that the sky grows
darker yet and the sea rises ever higher
night shall be thrice night over you and
heaven and iron cope do you have joy
without cause and faith without hope
thank you
[Applause]
whoo better all right to literary
this speech by attorney William Kunstler
will re-air on c-span to our companion
Network at 12:15 a.m. and 6:35 a.m.
Eastern Times America and the courts can
be seen every Saturday night at 7:00
p.m. Eastern Time for Pacific